*What is this document? I think it's something I wrote early-ish in
 2014 to describe what I would do in a 3 credit version of 545 versus
 the 1.5 credit version we'd offered in the past. Found it lying
 around in a directory I want to delete.*

# Data wrangling and exploration

## What is data wrangling? Why do we need to teach it?

* See an email I wrote to nancy on April 28 subject "Data Science update 547" *

> Analysis is what data scientists do for fun after they've slogged through the tedious stuff. -- paraphrased tweet from @KirkKBorne

> Others estimate that data cleaning accounts for up to 80% of the development time and cost in data warehousing projects.... We define such data wrangling as a process of iterative data exploration and transformation that enables analysis. -- Research directions in data wrangling: Visualizations and transformations for usable and credible data, Sean Kandel, Jeffrey Heer, Catherine Plaisant,
Jessie Kennedy, Frank van Ham, Nathalie Henry Riche, Chris Weaver, Bongshin Lee, Dominique Brodbeck and Paolo Buono. Information Visualization Journal, 10(4), 271–288, 2011. [PDF](http://vis.stanford.edu/files/2011-DataWrangling-IVJ.pdf)

> In response to the spectacular opportunities and immense challenges presented by the dawning era of "Big Data" in biomedical research, the NIH has developed the Big Data to Knowledge (BD2K) initiative.... However, the ability to release data, to locate, integrate, and analyze data generated by others, and to utilize the data is often limited by the lack of tools, accessibility, and training. The purpose of this BD2K U01 Funding Opportunity Announcement (FOA) is to solicit development of software tools and analysis methods in the four topic areas of data compression/reduction, data visualization, data provenance, and data wrangling as part of the overall BD2K initiative. -- [February 2014 NIH funding announcement](http://grants.nih.gov/grants/guide/rfa-files/RFA-HG-14-020.html)

## Topics

__Very roughly__ one topic = one class meeting. Not to be taken too literally.

  * Set up the tools. Bash shell, R/RStudio, Python/iPython, (NumPy? Pandas?), Git/GitHub.
  * Establish workflow / working environments. Use of an appropriate integrated development environment (IDE) or equivalent. Moving gracefully between interactive use/development and running scripts in "batch mode".
  * Filesystem. Query, manipulate, organize from shell, R, Python.
  * Object types in R and Python. Define, create, query, modify, subset, index. Esp. those relevant to data science, e.g. data.frames. In R, special attention to factors.
  * Data reshaping, tidy data.
  * Data aggregation. Split-apply-combine. In R, `plyr` and `dplyr`. In Python?
  * Get data into wrangling and analysis environment. From file, database, web (using implemented APIs). Delimited files, YAML, JSON.
  * Get data, results, and figures out of wrangling and analysis environment. To open formats, to files, to relevant repositories.
  * Regular expressions and programmatic transformation and searching of character data.
  * Functions and modularization. In R and Python.
  * Iteration and flow control. In R, integrate tightly with vectorization and data aggregation. In Python?
  * Testing, both informal and formal.
  * Databases / SQL. *Not setting them up but working with them, writing queries.*
  * Set up graphics tools and cover related conceptual model. In R, Grammar of Graphics as implmented in `ggplot2`. In Python? 
  * Statistical summaries and visual counterparts for
    - one variable: quantitative and categorical
    - combinations of 2 - 4 variables, potentially a mix of quantitative and categorical
    - multivariate, emphasis on quantitative variables
  * Stats particularly useful in exploration (and neglected in standard intro stats courses!)
    - robust summary statistics
    - robust regression
    - smoothing
    - density estimation
    - cluster analysis, PCA, SVD, MDS
  * Use of color (and shape, etc.). Human perception, color models.
  * Dynamic documents. Integrating actual source, English prose, and artefacts of the source. In R, `knitr` (and `brew`?). In Python, iPython notebooks? The union of R and iPython notebooks.
  * Exposing data, code, and "baked" products on the web. E.g. `jekyll`.
  * Workstyles that organically support reproducibility, openness, and collaboration. Version control.
  * Coding style and standards.
  * Organizating analytical projects.
  * Web scraping.
  * Distributing data and code to the world. R packages. In Python?
  * Dealing with missing data. Imputation.
  * Automating an analytical pipeline. Make.
  * Other graphics topics? Such as D3.js? Shiny?
  
## Better bullets for update in stat retreat

  * Personal system administration
  * Version control, local and remote/hosted operations
  * R and Python and associated development/run environments
  * Data intake, esp. using APIs, from a database, web scraping
  * Testing and validation
  * Packaging and automation
  * Dynamic reporting, i.e. integrating prose, code, and artefacts
  * Disseminating results, esp. targetting the web, utilizing repositories
  
## Resources and links

  * Bad Data Handbook. Selected chapter titles:
    - Is It Just Me, or Does This Data Smell Funny?
    - Data Intended for Human Consumption, Not Machine Consumption. (spreadsheets are evil)
    - Bad Data Lurking in Plain Text. (the horrors of character encoding)
    - When Databases Attack: A Guide for When to Stick to Files
    - Data Traceability
  * Creating More Effective Graphs by Naomi B. Robbins
    - <http://www.amazon.com/Creating-Effective-Graphs-Naomi-Robbins/dp/0985911123>
  * Grammar of graphics
    - <http://ggplot2.org>
  * Nine simple ways to make it easier to (re)use your data by Ethan P White, Elita Baldridge, Zachary T. Brym, Kenneth J. Locey, Daniel J. McGlinn, Sarah R. Supp.
    - Ideas in Ecology and Evolution 6(2): 1–10, 2013. doi:10.4033/iee.2013.6b.6.f <http://library.queensu.ca/ojs/index.php/IEE/article/view/4608>
  * Tidy data by Hadley Wickham. Preprint available <http://vita.had.co.nz/papers/tidy-data.pdf>.  
  * CS109 Data Science, Harvard.
    - <http://cs109.org/syllabus.php>
    - [A Rubric for Data Wrangling and Exploration](http://nbviewer.ipython.org/github/cs109/content/blob/master/lec_04_wrangling.ipynb)
    - [lectures on Google Drive](https://drive.google.com/folderview?id=0BxYkKyLxfsNVd0xicUVDS1dIS0k&usp=sharing)
